URL SHORTENER PROJECT EXPLANATION

1. Project Summary

This project is a backend-focused URL Shortener application built with Java, Spring Boot, and MySQL. It exposes REST APIs to create a short URL from a long URL, redirect users from the short URL to the original URL, fetch URL details, and view click analytics. It also includes a simple HTML, CSS, and JavaScript frontend for project presentation and manual testing.

The application demonstrates REST API design, layered backend architecture, database integration using Spring Data JPA, input validation, global exception handling, logging, structured JSON responses, short code generation, and click count tracking.

2. How URL Shortening Works

A long URL such as:
https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot

is converted into a shorter URL such as:
http://localhost:8080/aB91xK2

The application stores the relationship between the generated short code and the original URL in MySQL. When a user opens the short URL, the backend extracts the short code, looks up the original URL in the database, increments the click count, and redirects the browser to the original URL.

3. REST API Architecture Explanation

The project follows REST API best practices:

- POST is used to create a short URL.
- GET is used to read URL details and analytics.
- GET /{shortCode} is used for browser redirection.
- Request bodies and responses use JSON.
- HTTP status codes communicate the result:
  - 201 Created for successful short URL creation.
  - 200 OK for successful reads.
  - 400 Bad Request for validation errors.
  - 404 Not Found for unknown short codes.
  - 500 Internal Server Error for unexpected failures.

The REST layer does not contain business logic. It accepts HTTP requests, validates input, delegates to the service layer, and returns structured responses.

4. Database Design Explanation

The main table is url_mappings.

Columns:

- id: Primary key, auto-generated by MySQL.
- long_url: Original URL entered by the user. Maximum length is 2048 characters.
- short_code: Unique short code used in the short URL.
- click_count: Number of times the short URL has been opened.
- created_at: Timestamp when the mapping was created.
- last_accessed_at: Timestamp when the short URL was last used.

Index:

- A unique index on short_code enables fast lookup and prevents duplicate short codes.
- long_url is not indexed by default because URLs can be up to 2048 characters, and indexing that full value can exceed MySQL index length limits in some configurations. A production system could store a separate fixed-length hash of long_url if duplicate long URL lookups must be optimized.

5. Hashing/Short Code Generation Explanation

This project uses a Base62 random short code generator. Base62 contains:

- 10 digits: 0-9
- 26 uppercase letters: A-Z
- 26 lowercase letters: a-z

Each short code has 7 characters. With 62 possible values per character, the total code space is:

62^7 = 3,521,614,606,208 possible codes

The generator uses SecureRandom to select characters. After generating a code, the service checks MySQL to confirm that the code does not already exist. If a collision occurs, it tries again. This demonstrates hashing-style compact key generation and collision handling.

6. Request-Response Flow

Shorten URL flow:

1. The frontend sends POST /api/urls/shorten with a longUrl.
2. The controller validates the request body.
3. The service trims the URL and checks if it already exists.
4. If the URL exists, the existing short URL is returned.
5. If it does not exist, the service generates a unique short code.
6. The repository saves the mapping in MySQL.
7. The API returns a structured JSON response.

Redirect flow:

1. The user opens GET /{shortCode}.
2. The controller passes the short code to the service.
3. The service finds the mapping in MySQL.
4. The service increments click_count and updates last_accessed_at.
5. The controller redirects the browser to the original URL.

Analytics flow:

1. The frontend or Postman calls GET /api/urls/{shortCode}/analytics.
2. The service finds the URL mapping.
3. The API returns long URL, short URL, click count, creation time, and last access time.

7. DSA Concepts Involved

Hashing:
The short code works like a compact key that maps to a long URL value.

Collision handling:
Generated short codes may rarely collide. The service checks the database and regenerates when needed.

Search and lookup:
The application frequently searches by short_code. A database index makes lookup efficient.

Counting:
Each redirect increments click_count, demonstrating a simple counter update.

String handling:
The project validates, trims, stores, and combines URL strings.

8. Backend Architecture Explanation

The backend uses layered architecture:

Controller layer:
Handles HTTP requests and responses. UrlController exposes endpoints for shortening, redirecting, fetching details, and analytics.

Service layer:
Contains business logic. UrlServiceImpl handles short code creation, duplicate URL reuse, click tracking, and response conversion.

Repository layer:
Handles database access. UrlMappingRepository extends JpaRepository and provides methods such as findByShortCode, findByLongUrl, and existsByShortCode.

Model layer:
UrlMapping represents the database table.

DTO layer:
DTO classes define request and response shapes, keeping API contracts separate from database entities.

Exception layer:
GlobalExceptionHandler returns consistent JSON errors for validation failures, not-found errors, and unexpected exceptions.

9. Frontend Explanation

The frontend is stored in src/main/resources/static and is served directly by Spring Boot.

Files:

- index.html: Defines the page structure.
- styles.css: Provides clean responsive styling.
- script.js: Calls the backend APIs using fetch.

Frontend features:

- URL input field.
- Generate short URL button.
- Short URL result display.
- Redirect testing section.
- Click analytics display.

10. API Endpoint Explanation

POST /api/urls/shorten

Request:
{
  "longUrl": "https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot"
}

Response:
{
  "success": true,
  "message": "Short URL generated successfully",
  "data": {
    "shortCode": "aB91xK2",
    "shortUrl": "http://localhost:8080/aB91xK2",
    "longUrl": "https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot",
    "clickCount": 0,
    "createdAt": "2026-05-28T10:00:00"
  },
  "timestamp": "2026-05-28T10:00:00"
}

GET /{shortCode}

Redirects the browser to the original long URL and increments click count.
The redirect route is constrained to the generated 7-character Base62 code format so static frontend files such as styles.css and script.js are not intercepted by the redirect controller.

GET /api/urls/{shortCode}

Returns URL details without redirecting.

GET /api/urls/{shortCode}/analytics

Returns analytics including click count and last accessed time.

Validation error response example:

{
  "success": false,
  "message": "Validation failed",
  "status": 400,
  "errors": {
    "longUrl": "longUrl must start with http:// or https://"
  },
  "timestamp": "2026-05-28T10:00:00"
}

11. Time Complexity Discussion

Short code generation:
O(1) average time because the code length is fixed at 7 characters.

Database lookup by short code:
O(log n) in a typical indexed relational database implementation. From the application perspective, it behaves like a fast indexed lookup.

Redirect:
O(log n) for finding the short code plus O(1) for incrementing click count.

Analytics:
O(log n) for finding the short code.

Creating a new mapping:
O(log n) for checking duplicate long URL and short code uniqueness, plus O(log n) for insert/index update.

Space complexity:
O(n), where n is the number of stored URL mappings.

12. Interview Explanation Section

A concise interview explanation:

"I built a URL Shortener using Spring Boot and MySQL. The user sends a long URL to a REST endpoint. The backend validates the input, generates a 7-character Base62 short code, checks for collisions in MySQL, and stores the mapping. When the short URL is opened, the backend looks up the short code, increments the click count, records the last access time, and redirects the user to the original URL. The project follows layered architecture with controller, service, repository, DTO, model, and exception handling layers. It also returns structured JSON responses and includes a small frontend and Postman collection for testing."

Key points to mention:

- REST APIs are cleanly separated from business logic.
- MySQL stores persistent mappings and analytics.
- A unique database index protects short_code uniqueness.
- Validation prevents invalid URLs.
- Global exception handling gives consistent error responses.
- Click tracking happens during redirect.

13. Future Scalability Improvements

- Use Redis cache for short_code to long_url lookups.
- Use a distributed ID generator or Snowflake-style IDs for predictable uniqueness at high scale.
- Add custom aliases so users can choose short codes.
- Add expiration dates for short URLs.
- Add user accounts and per-user dashboards.
- Add rate limiting to prevent abuse.
- Add asynchronous analytics processing through Kafka or RabbitMQ.
- Add geographic, device, and referrer analytics.
- Add database read replicas for high redirect traffic.
- Add horizontal scaling with a load balancer.
- Add a CDN or edge redirect layer for global low-latency redirects.
